Hey, YouTube.
Hey, Chad.
Hey, Michael.
Hey, great to have you here.
Super excited to be doing this podcast today.
Those of you out in the audience, please put some comments and thoughts and ideas into
the live chat.
We'll try to make part of the show.
If you're watching afterwards, well, that's over, but thanks for watching anyway.
All right, let's kick this off, Chad.
Chad, welcome to Talk Bythonomy.
Thanks, Michael.
That's fantastic.
You're going to be talking about Python.
I'm going to be talking about Python.
Anyway, all right, let's kick this off, Chad.
Chad, welcome to Talk Python to Me.
- Thanks, Michael.
- It's fantastic to have you here.
I and many listeners are such a fan of PIPX
and really just love to have that tool around
to allow us to use Python libraries
and commands like applications.
And it's gonna be so fun to talk about.
And if you're out there and you haven't heard of PIPX,
you're in for a treat.
So before we get to that, though, let's start with your story.
How did you get into programming in Python?
- So I got into programming back when the internet was kind of like really
popular with GeoCities, like early web development type stuff.
So...
- This is the time when people had like the animated digging Giphy and like a lot
of sites were still permanently under construction?
- Yes.
And flashing text and stuff like that.
So I thought that was pretty cool.
I messed around with some Geocities pages.
I wrote a little bit of JavaScript
where you can hover over text, and it will change the image
and stuff like that.
And I kind of messed around with web pages for a while,
but I didn't really get too serious with programming
with web development until later, much later.
So when I got more into programming was in college.
I got a degree in aerospace engineering,
and so we did kind of scientific computing.
we used MATLAB a lot.
So I used a lot of MATLAB in college.
And then in my first job, we did a lot of MATLAB.
So in the aerospace industry for making airplanes and flight
control systems, we used MATLAB a lot.
And so I kind of started hacking on MATLAB
and making a bunch of programs and automating stuff,
not really going into other programming languages, which
were probably better suited for the job.
I just kind of did everything in MATLAB.
And--
>>Victor: Well, but that's the way I think many people--
most people do it, is they have a set of tools to pick from
that they know how to work with them.
And they're like, well, which one of these is going to be best?
And if you're programming environments in MATLAB,
then that's not a terrible choice, really.
>>Chris: Yeah.
So I got really into programming MATLAB,
and then eventually ended up at a job
where I got to start doing a little Python.
>>Victor: Nice.
>>Chris: And so that job was--
What kind of airplanes were you working on?
So my first job was on the Space Shuttle, which
has been retired.
And then I worked for Boeing.
That's fantastic.
Yeah, I worked from the 747, 787.
So I worked for Boeing.
So Boeing worked on the Space Shuttle,
as well as, obviously, a bunch of other planes.
And then none of the Python work was there, though.
The Python stuff started at a startup
funded by Google co-founder Larry Page.
So it was an eVTOL,
Electric Vertical Takeoff and Landing Plane.
So it's like a small plane.
It was a startup.
It was a small company.
And we needed like basically some tools to be made.
And I didn't really know Python,
but I like to just take on new challenges
and learn new things.
So my first experience with Python was with Python 2
and working on a Django app.
It was an app to track all the parts and weights
and moments of inertia of the aircraft.
And another project was called a protocol compiler.
So all the C code that ran on the avionics, a lot of it
was generated.
A lot of the inter-device communication
was generated from this common protocol definition.
And so this was all written in Python.
So we could generate safety critical C code.
We could generate documentation about the code.
We could generate tests where we had like
hardware in the loop tests.
And so that was where I started to run into issues
with challenges with packaging
and getting dependencies installed on folks' computers
because if you wanted to build the flight code,
you needed to have a bunch of packages available.
- Right, and so, you know,
you had to have maybe some foundational thing in order,
some libraries and other things.
and you probably didn't want to teach necessarily
see people how to set up Python and virtual environments
and all that kind of stuff, right?
Or documentation writers.
Yeah.
- Exactly.
And yeah, it was a small company.
So there wasn't really a Python expert in house.
So we kind of made a lot of the mistakes
and I had to go into the infrastructure side too
and try to build all that out.
And so, you know, we started out with,
I think we started out with pseudo pip install
and that was how we got our things installed.
- Mm-hmm, yeah, for sure.
Well, you talk about this, the small business
or a small company you're at and sort of bouncing
off the walls and just figuring it out yourself,
but you were also at Boeing, which is a non-small company.
Am I looking in from the outside?
- Right.
- I know a lot of people, they definitely dream of
or look to get hired at these really large companies.
And yet I feel like there's a huge advantage
to at least spending a little time in a company
like this VTOL one you talked about
where you're taking on a lot of responsibilities
and you're kind of working together to figure out stuff
rather than slotting into like a narrow slice
of what's getting done, what do you think?
What was your experience in those places?
- Well, so Boeing did offer opportunities
to let you kind of like improve processes
and stuff like that.
But the scope of what you're working on at a small company,
trying to build a similar product,
I mean, you have a smaller team with no like legacy
or decades of history building stuff.
You're kind of just inventing it as you go.
So yeah, there's a ton of stuff to experiment with
and take on and learn from.
- Yeah, cool.
How about now?
You're at another small company, right?
- Yeah, I'm at a small company called Meta.
I work for Reality Labs, and I work on developer infrastructure
here as well.
I work on things like language services, debuggers,
and VS Code, VS Code extensions.
>> Yeah.
Do you have any exposure to the Cinder project or any
of the stuff going on over there?
>> No, I'm aware of it.
I think it's super cool.
But that's an Instagram thing, really.
And so it's not really something I use day to day.
>> Well, it looks like it's going to become a Python thing
in little bits and pieces.
>> Yeah.
>> The pieces of it are being pulled over.
We just talked about PEP 690 and lazy imports.
And there's a couple of other things people
are working to move in.
So not the whole thing, but some of those features
and improvements will make it to all of us.
>> Yeah, that's the great thing about Python is if you come up
with a good idea, the community is very open
and willing to adopt new ideas.
The best ideas win and can be continuously improving
the language.
- Yeah, that's pretty fantastic.
So let's start our conversation here
at a little bit higher level than just PipX.
And let's just talk about packaging a little bit.
So let me switch over here to this project.
So you have over at chadsmith.dev,
which is a great domain name.
And I'm impressed with a name like Chad Smith
that you can get it just straight up as your domain name.
'Cause as Michael Kennedy,
all the Irish politicians are all over me.
Like I gotta go with some crazy variation
to come up with it.
But yeah, that's cool.
That's a great domain name.
And over there at slash Python dash packaging,
you've got the big list of Python packaging
and distribution tools.
You wanna tell us about this?
Kind of gives you a high level of like,
what are the options, right?
Yeah, so a lot of times, questions
come up about what tools are out there, which tools do what.
It's a big world in the packaging,
in the Python packaging world.
And I wanted to make something that was kind of non-opinionated
and just kind of factual, like here's some data,
here's some information about these.
You can decide for yourself.
It's not trying to persuade you to use this.
It's not like saying, this is my tool.
This one's the best.
And this came about from PIPX's documentation,
where one of the questions on PIPX was, what is it
and how does it compare to other things?
So I had a list on the documentation.
And it kept growing.
And I was thinking, this could be its own thing,
because I don't want to make the PIPX documentation too big.
Make it a survey of all the other things
that it competes with or could have been put alongside, right?
Yeah.
So this is an interactive web app table type thing.
And it pulls data from GitHub's GraphQL API.
And it lets you select different features and filter on those.
You can compare and group tools together.
So on the top left, you'll see there's
a bunch of little blue words with blue backgrounds.
And you can click on those.
And if you click on them, then it'll filter down the table.
So if you want to find tools that can install and publish,
you can click on Install CLI Apps and also Publish Packages.
>> Nice.
Look at that.
This is a great little UI.
Reminds me of an app I wrote once,
and I'm having nice nostalgia here.
It's cool.
So you can click on these little categories or filters
and turn multiple ones on and off.
So if I want virtual environment management,
I can install libraries.
Well, apparently there's none of those,
but if I want to build packages and install CLI apps,
well, I guess PDM is my choice, huh?
- Right.
- That's cool.
So maybe one thing that we could do that would be nice
is maybe we could go through and highlight
some of the more notable packaging solutions or options
as we go through here, you know, PipX being one of them,
We'll get to that a bunch more.
But want to maybe give us a bit of a rundown?
Probably the first really notable one is Conda.
People are super familiar with that, right?
On the DeepSight side.
Yeah, so Conda is kind of like a more ambitious way
to create environments.
And it kind of makes its own ecosystem.
I personally haven't used it, but I
I know it's pretty popular, like you said,
with the scientific community.
So it also can be used to make C libraries, too.
>>Luis: Interesting.
Yeah, it's certainly-- the claim to fame of Conda,
and Anaconda, and Miniconda, all those things
is you don't have to have the build
tools for all the libraries, the transitive closure
of the libraries you want to use, right?
>>Tom: Right.
And it's--
>>Luis: Getting there a little bit with--
Yeah, sorry, go ahead.
Didn't mean to speak over you.
- My understanding is it's its own packaging system.
Like you don't pip install from it.
There's some other parallel ecosystem.
- Right, exactly.
And I feel like to some degree with wheels,
we're a little bit closer
than we used to be with pip directly.
Right, pip install wheel can just drop in a thing,
whereas previously, you know,
stuff had to happen on your machine to finalize that package.
Yeah, wheels are specific to your Python version,
your operating system.
And so, yeah, that can just be basically unzipped and used.
- Yeah, that was fantastic.
Except for the first couple of weeks of the M1 platform,
the Apple Silicon M1s, you try to install something.
Nope, we don't have a wheel for that platform.
What do you mean you don't have a wheel?
Come on.
But, you know, I think that's pretty far in the past now.
I haven't run into that problem for a long time.
Yeah, OK, cool.
Another one on here that's clearly pretty popular
and in this C generating native code category is Cython.
Yeah, Cython is super interesting.
And it takes advantage of one of the pretty cool features
of Python itself.
So Cython can generate C code from your Python code.
And it generates shared objects.
And shared objects are able to be imported directly
from Python.
So you can make a basically like a wheel
that is native code built from your Python code.
And if you have code that is really run really frequently,
like a really hot path, that Python is just a little bit
too slow for you, you can really easily use
Cython to convert that into C and make a shared object
and then just use that, or just that module
or just that function that you wanted to speed up.
>>Yeah, there's some interesting examples of that.
For example, UV loop, which is the fast drop-in replacement
for async I/O, that was written in Cython,
built on top of libuvc library, I think.
Here's one of those tight loops where this is the while true
or the for in loop that does all the magic, right?
And so, you know, doing something like this
makes a lot of sense.
- Absolutely.
- Yeah.
Let's see.
- I was surprised.
- Go ahead.
- I was surprised how easy it was to use Cython.
You know, you can just basically run it,
point it at a file and it just converts it to C.
And it makes, and you can import it too.
It makes the shared object.
It's just kind of like,
- Yeah, exactly. - It's just magically
turns into something, hopefully it all works,
but it turns into something that runs a lot faster.
- Yeah, it really is neat.
If you use the Python type hints,
you can get even a little bit better.
Right? - Yeah, so--
- Or if you go farther, you can import the Cython integer
instead of just a regular int and so on.
- Yeah, and now Cython has typing in Pythons.
So Cython also has its own kind of parallel language
where you write like a pyx file
and you have Cython annotations.
But now with type hints becoming more prevalent
in Python itself, there are also Cython type hints,
which allows you to write just straight Python code,
but Cython still recognizes how to convert it
to a statically typed C type.
- Right, I think that makes it way more approachable
for many people, 'cause they don't feel like
they have to go learn something different.
They're like, well, if I just put type hints on this,
maybe different type hints, then we're good to go.
which is pretty cool.
Yeah, all right, that question from the audience
is from Jurgen.
Hey, Chad, what about build out?
Made up your mind on whether to include it?
What's the story with build out in this?
- Yeah, so on the Python packaging table,
there were some suggestions in the issue tracker,
and one of them was around build out.
And it was something I hadn't heard of before.
I'm still considering whether to add that or not,
but I think I will.
>> Leaning towards, yes.
>> Okay.
I'm not sure if I've -- I don't think I've done anything with buildout.
Okay.
Very nice.
And also I saw that pie to app.
I don't think pie to app was there, was it?
>> It wasn't, no.
>> So, yeah, so what's the criteria for being on that list, I guess?
I guess.
Yeah, I just kind of made it as--
started just as a comparison to PIPX,
where people might be confused or wonder which one to choose.
And then it's kind of just grown organically,
just things I thought were interesting or relevant.
I think they should be something that is still--
so something that people would want to use.
Because there's a lot of changes in the packaging landscape.
And there's a lot of stuff that gets left behind that you
really wouldn't want to use anymore.
There's new tools being made.
There's new standards being defined.
So I want it to be something that's
modern, relevant, something that's encouraged to be used.
I think Buildout was--
I was concerned it was a little bit maybe older.
And I hadn't heard of it.
And you haven't heard of it.
So I wasn't really sure how it was something
that we should still encourage folks to use or not.
- Yeah, here's an interesting,
have you checked out the ESF developer survey results
this year?
- I have not.
- Yeah, so they have a section on basically
which tools related to packaging do you use?
And they break it down by popularity,
which I thought was pretty cool.
- That's really interesting.
- Yeah, so for people just listening,
it's 81% of the people say they use PIP,
and then 32% of the people use VNV.
I feel like that's pretty low, honestly.
It should be higher.
I don't know what's going on there,
but then you've got 30% of people use containers,
23% use virtual ENV, and then 22% is condo.
We got poetry, PIP, ENV, Aflit, PDM,
and others are like way down, way down in the list there.
Yeah, so anyway.
Does that strike you as what your mental model you had in mind a little bit?
Yeah, roughly, there's a few surprises in there.
But I think it's I think all those should be in this table.
If they're not, I'm going to have to check that list and update the table.
Sure, sure. Well, you know, maybe not the container stuff, right?
Because that's kind of what just like I have a virtual machine.
I mean, virtual machines are also in there, right?
Just like which I think means I have a virtual machine.
So I don't care if I just trash it and just bust its system.
They customize its system Python.
For me, when I set up my servers, I don't do that.
I actually create a virtual environment
for the apps running on that server or maybe multiple ones,
but often it's just running one service.
So I just create a virtual environment for it,
just for the isolation alone.
So it doesn't say, well, you can't use this version
of some library 'cause it's being used
by some part of the system.
- Yeah. - Yeah.
- Yeah, I mean, you can really cause yourself
huge headaches messing with parts of the system.
Like one time, I think I tried to rename Python.
I think I repointed my Python 3 alias
to a different, like a newer version of Python 3
'cause I wanted that to just be what it used.
And pretty sure my computer didn't start after that.
- Yeah, while I just have this page up,
I just wanna also show that PipX does show up over here
on tools for installing packages instead of managing it.
and yeah, so.
- Oh, very cool.
- Coming along there, pretty cool.
- By the way, there is a PEP I saw around
not clobbering system installs
where you have like Ubuntu managing its own Python packages
and you install to it or you uninstall something
and kind of like mess up your whole system.
There's a PEP out there to address that
and to not mix things in there.
- Oh, that's cool.
I feel like almost Ubuntu on those different systems
could say, we're going to have our own isolated
environment for our stuff.
And what you want to do, even if you just run Python straight,
that's going to do something else.
But I don't know.
I don't know the mechanics of making all that happen.
There's a lot of pieces involved there.
Yeah.
Yeah, the isolation is definitely useful.
OK, back to the build stuff.
Maybe there's a couple of others here.
Like, we've got the sort of what I would call pip alternatives.
We've got Flit and Poetry, right?
Those are maybe, yeah, Flit and Poetry and PipBnV.
I guess those are all in a similar,
I know that I might be painting that
with too broad of a brush,
but they're all about installing,
you know, working with your environments,
installing stuff into your environments
for apps you're building, right?
- Yeah, and PyFlow as well.
And Hatch, there's quite a few.
- Yeah.
Yeah, I'm not familiar with Hatch.
Tell me about Hatch.
So I have heard Hatch mentioned, or I
think I've seen it around for a while.
I never really used it.
But then the creator of Hatch recently
added a pull request to PIPX to use the Hatch backend.
So with PEP 5.17 and 5.18, you can have basically anything
you want installed, build your wheel, or to--
yeah, build your build wheels.
So you can have different backends to build a wheel.
So Hatch has one called Hatchling.
And this is actually now in the packaging,
the Python packaging documentation.
Like if you go to like the Python packaging website,
like I think it's packaging.python.org,
there's instructions on how to like build,
to build a package, to distribute it.
And it uses the Hatchling backend,
which is a big achievement now.
It's no longer telling you to use setup.py.
>> Yeah.
>> It's telling you to use this new tool called Build.
>> Right, which is also on your list right at the top.
>> Yeah. It's alphabetical.
>> Yeah. Well, it wins.
I guess the A, A, A, A, A,
V, and V has maybe got a spot to still take the top notch there.
>> That's a good idea.
- Nice, you do also have things like GitHub stars and stuff.
Can you sort by them?
Yeah, you can, right?
Yeah.
- I think I just added the star emoji
and I think it screwed up the sorting.
So I'll have to work on that.
- Oh, it sorts by alphabetical
then with the start of the star.
- Yeah, and I also, yeah.
- Okay.
The challenges we run into.
Okay.
Yeah, so this is really cool.
Anything else you want to give a shout out to while we're here
before we move on?
>> Py03 is super cool.
I played around with that.
So Py03 is a way to call Rust code from your Python code.
So kind of similar to Cython, except it doesn't
generate Rust code for you.
You have to have something already built in Rust.
But it's pretty easy to use.
There's a really popular Rust tool
called RipGrip, which is like Grip,
but rewritten in Rust with a nice API.
It's super fast.
And one thing I tried just to learn Rust and learn PyO3
was to write an API in Python that
called into the ripgrep Rust code.
And--
>>Right, OK, cool.
>>And that actually worked pretty well.
I was pleased with the development process
and how fast it all ran.
Nice.
All right, let's see.
One more bit of follow up on this.
That Juergen says, talks will also
use Hatchling with version 4, which is pretty cool.
Nice.
Yeah, I think that it's probably going
to gain a lot more traction.
Yeah, it sounds like I need to learn about Hatchling.
And Hatch.
Pretty cool.
All right, so another thing that's interesting here
that is sort of in the same space that we could talk about
is pep582.
To me, pep582 feels a lot like
Node modules for Python, sort of that.
Where is the, what is it, project.json
and then the Node modules folder next to it, right?
There's a folder and it has a name.
That's where your packages get installed to.
And if you run Python commands below it,
it will traverse the directory up looking for that
to find its effective virtual environment
instead of the traditional virtual environment behaviors
we all know.
Right?
Right.
Yeah.
So what are your thoughts there?
So I stumbled across this.
I don't remember how I found it.
But when I saw it, I was like, oh my gosh, this is incredible.
I can't wait for this to land.
I'm a big TypeScript developer.
I like TypeScript, like JavaScript.
So I can kind of compare the two because I do a lot of work in both.
And when I saw this, I was really excited.
- Like the Node version for Python.
- Yeah, because there's been a lot of headaches with global installs and
globally installing packages and conflicting with the OS.
And so, and having that extra step to always activate a virtual environment,
create one, or delete one, or recreate a new one, it can get tedious.
And so, and it's also a bit, it's part of the environment, right?
Like Python packages is this file on a file system.
You know, it's there.
If you, if you want to start over, you just RM it, RMRF the
folder and you can start over.
Um, so when I saw this, I was really excited and I thought the,
acceptance of it would be imminent and we'd be using PyPackages, very soon.
Like, oh, this we're the next release.
The world is different.
Right.
Yeah.
And so you can see on the--
>> And yet--
>> Right.
>> Yeah.
And yet, it says this is targeting version 3.8.
It's still in draft status.
And that was 2018.
So it's four years ago.
>> So one thing I want to mention is, as you mentioned, this is like node modules for Python.
And one of the authors of the PEP mentioned that he doesn't want folks to think of it
like that.
it's not a bad analogy, but it's more like an auto activated virtual environment.
Yes.
Or an automatically recognized.
So, you want him to think of it like that because he didn't want to have nested Py packages
where we can have this like complicated nesting of, you know, each package has its own Py
packages.
Like a fallback as you go up and yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, I hear you.
But to me, it seems like it would simplify a lot of stuff.
For example, if I have a cookie cutter template
and I wanna just make sure that that project
has its own environment,
the cookie cutter could just create this folder
at the top level and you're kinda good to go.
You know what I mean?
You don't have to do a bunch of virtual environment stuff.
It just, that's the one, right?
- Yeah.
- If you've got working with people who are new to Python,
you can just say here, unzip this and run it.
And it'll start out empty,
but maybe the first step is to verify
all the stuff is there.
But you don't have to--
there's just that bootstrapping to get started,
which as you gain experience, it's no big deal.
But I often encounter people who are new to this,
and they kind of bounce off it, which is unfortunate.
Yeah, I think when you come across a project,
or especially someone newer to the language
comes across a project, and they see instructions are
pip install this thing, it's really
kind of a loaded instruction to give someone.
Because you might be basically breaking things
in the process.
You might be setting yourself up for some kind of failure.
Right, it could get installed to their system.
They might not have permission to install it to the system.
Yeah, there's a lot of stuff going on there.
It also might install a version of a package
that another tool requires a different version of,
'cause it'll just kind of update it with what it needs.
If there's an outdated version or something,
it'll just give you a newer version,
which may inadvertently break some other tool
that depends on that older version for some reason.
- Right, then all of a sudden your fail to ban
or your firewall or something stops working.
You're like, why did that stop working?
Remote Glances or some other tool,
you're like, I thought that was part of my machine now,
it doesn't work anymore.
And your little test project or tutorial broke it.
- Right.
And so that's probably suboptimal.
Yeah.
So this was exciting to me because you could pip install
something and it would go to this PyPackages directory
potentially.
And you wouldn't really have to worry
about any other side effects or any other environment
that you're affecting.
Maybe someday.
Not for the moment.
Well, we do have this other tool called
PipX that does manage this somewhat
for a certain class of problems, right?
But this is more for building packages
and applications and stuff,
not so much external tools, but still.
- Yeah, I think there are different use cases.
I think this one's more for libraries,
like building your library or not necessarily the app.
- Yeah.
- Well, you pointed out some implementations
or experimental things going on with this one.
So let's see here.
We've got, yes, you got PyLock here.
This is you, right?
- Yeah, that's fine.
- Yeah, so PyLock is a drop-in replacement
that imports packages from this directory
and it's like an experimentation
or an experimental implementation of this, right?
Right. Yeah. So I called it Python loc was the idea like local, local, yeah. It's good
for like local packages, I was thinking. I don't know. The name could be revised, I guess.
But, but yeah, I mean, I saw the, I saw the path and I thought it was super cool. And
I thought, hey, maybe I can hack something together and let people try it. Because I
think trying, discussing how something might work and actually using it is kind of like
looking at a picture of somewhere you want to take a vacation and actually going there.
It's like going to a place versus just hearing
a description of it.
So if we make something we can play around with,
you can see, oh, I thought this would be cool,
but it actually is way harder to use.
Or maybe it's exactly what I thought I wanted,
and it's great, and let's accept the pep.
So I made this just as a way for folks
to easily experiment with this kind of workflow.
- Yeah, okay, great.
And people can play with it.
Although, who knows where this idea is going?
I still think it has legs, but yeah,
it's been chilling for a while.
What else?
And then there's PDM.
I've heard of people using PDM and is this,
does this follow?
Yeah, it seems like it follows the same idea, right?
Tell us about PDM real quick.
- Yeah, so PDM is kind of like Poetry.
It uses PEP 582, so it uses the Py packages directory.
But yeah, it's similar in the idea of poetry
or similar tools like PIPN,
not the ones you mentioned, PyFlow.
So it creates and modifies the pyproject.toml file.
It can add its own metadata to it.
It can build packages.
It can publish packages.
I'd have to consult that table.
But yeah, I think it's kind of like an all-in-one tool.
That also uses PEP 582.
Right, exactly. So it does a lot more, but it does happen to also use this idea, right?
Right. And in the discussion on, in the PEP 582 discussion on where all the folks were
discussing like the pros and cons, the developer of PDM mentions that, like what his experience
was with it, some of the tweaks he had to make to the PEP
to make it work for him.
And I saw that there was some interest in-- and also
PyFlow is another tool similar to PDM.
It's written in Rust.
But I think Brett Cannon was interested in working
with those two folks to maybe flesh out PEP 582 a little more
because they have some real world experience.
OK, interesting.
Yeah, it doesn't sound like the PEP is dead.
It sounds like it's stalled is more maybe how I understand it.
Yeah, I think one of the-- so there
were two original authors.
One of them is no longer interested in pursuing it,
but the other is.
I think he's just been a little bit busy
and hasn't had time to dedicate to it.
But I think there's still potential for it.
Sure.
OK, cool.
Well, let's move on to the star of the show, PipX.
How do you tell people about PipX?
PipX is a tool to install and run applications that
happen to be written in Python.
Yeah.
So go ahead.
I was going to say, I think of it as Homebrew or AppGet
or Chocolaty or one of these package managers
where I just wanna get this command
or this application on my computer.
I don't really care what it's written in.
It's probably written in something tough
that I have to install weird dependencies for
or I gotta have some odd compiler
and I don't wanna deal with it.
I just wanna, I know it if I type brew install handbrake
or something like I'll have that, right?
And that's what, that's the way I see PipX
is there's all these cool commands and CLIs and utilities
in Python, and they just happen to be in Python.
We as Python developers care a lot that that's the case,
but we just want the commands.
And with PipX, you can just type PipX, say, install pytest,
or PipX install Glances, or some other cool library.
And sure enough, you'll have it installed, right?
Yeah, that's the idea.
One of the goals is to take away
difficulty for end users to install a tool.
A lot of times, the instructions are like, install with pip.
And like I said, you can have problems with that.
That's kind of a loaded instruction sometimes
to give people, especially if they're not Python developers.
As a Python developer, if you see that,
you wouldn't really have trouble managing that.
But as a lot of folks--
a lot of folks out there that just want the tool
and the instructions are kind of like,
create a virtual environment, now run the pip
from that environment to install this tool,
now search into that bin path, and there's your binary.
Like, that's not really the easiest way
to get end users a really cool program that you wrote
that happens to be in Python.
Right, right.
I want to have this program accessible.
Oh, wait, did you forget which virtual environment you
installed it into, and did you forget to activate that,
or whatever, right?
So this solves a lot of those problems, which is fantastic.
Juergen again says, as you said, install and run
Python applications.
Does this refer only to CLI or even web apps?
- I'm not sure I understand the question.
Certainly CLI apps.
I'm not sure what a web app is in terms of this question.
- Sure, well, I guess maybe just kind of
install stuff more broadly.
Like if I had something maybe that was built with GUI,
for example, G-O-O-E-Y, like that GUI framework,
or I have something that was installed or built with
some other tool that when I run it,
maybe I don't get a CLI experience,
maybe it installs Flask and opens a browser or--
- Oh, gotcha. - Something like that, right?
Yeah, I think that's the question.
Yeah, yeah, absolutely.
That's actually where I found the need for PIPX most,
and a tool I made that happens to be a web app.
Where I have these--
so the tool is called GDB GUI.
And it's a web app that lets you debug programs with GDB.
Right, OK.
And so I had--
I was writing the readme to tell folks how to get it,
how to run it.
So people that are trying to debug things with GDB,
maybe they're Python developers,
but they're definitely C developers or Rust developers,
something, some kind of a native language.
So the readme instructions I wrote were,
I kind of like struggled with how to tell people
to install this.
Telling them to install pip with pip
was not something I was comfortable with
because there are so many dependencies GDB GUI has,
and I didn't really want to like break their system.
There was kind of two fears.
Like one, I didn't want to mess their system up
And two, I didn't know if it would work reliably
because maybe they would install something else and mess it up.
And so I searched for a while to find something
that could get this installed in a better way and found PIPSI.
BRIAN DORSEY: Mm-hmm, OK.
So yeah, PIPSI like this, yeah?
Yeah, P-I-P-S-I, OK.
- This is basically exactly what I wanted.
It gives you a single command
that creates a virtual environment,
installs package there,
and then exposes the binary entry point,
which if it sounds familiar, it is,
because that's what pipx is,
or origin is from, yeah.
- Right, and in fact, right at the top of the pipc,
read me, it says, "Pipc is no longer maintained.
You should check out pipx."
- Right.
So the origin of PipX came from one of the issues in PIPC
where someone--
we were having trouble getting changes merged to PIPC.
I found it.
I was really excited.
And I started making a bunch of pull requests on it.
And I was having trouble getting things merged.
And basically, the maintainers, they
weren't really-- they were OK with having it
in maintenance mode.
But they didn't really want to do active development with it.
And the owner, which was Armin Roedeker,
he had unsubscribed from the project
and wasn't really following it.
And so he was the only person that
was able to give more access to let people become maintainers
or so on.
So we weren't able to add ourselves as maintainers.
So we were kind of stuck with this tool.
We could-- maybe we could fork it.
Maybe we could make a new tool.
Yeah, so how'd you get from there to PipX?
So as I said, I'm into also TypeScript and the JavaScript
community.
And one of the tools they have there
is called NPX, which is pretty similar to PipX.
It lets you run CLI apps from Node, who also
can have similar challenges because it's
an interpreted language.
And so I made PipX to kind of add that capability to Python.
And then I added the ability, since it does kind of like,
it makes a virtual environment, it finds the binary in it,
and it runs it.
It's very similar to installing it.
It's basically installed in a temporary place
and runs it versus installing it in a permanent place.
And so I added the install capability on PIPX.
I shared it with some of the folks in the issue tracker.
And they were like, this works for me.
Let's go use that.
And yeah, the momentum continued around it.
and had a lot of really great contributors work on Pitfax.
Yeah, it's great.
The GitHub repo says 75 contributors and 5,000 GitHub
stars, which is pretty awesome.
Yeah, I'm really happy with it.
I think I use it all the time.
I personally really like it, and I'm
really glad to see other folks are enjoying it as well.
Yeah, I use it all the time.
It's one of my go-to tools when I want to check out
something I know is built with Python as an application
or I get a new machine.
We can talk about some of the fun stuff to install
in a little bit, but maybe let's first talk about
what happens and how do I use PipX?
What's the process?
You do have a nice animated GIF on the GitHub project
so people can see what happens.
But maybe walk us through it.
Like let's say Glances, right?
Glances is a fantastic application that you can use.
And if you run it on your machine,
it gives you this super rich terminal based real time view
into your servers, much, much better than, you know,
top or something like that.
And it also has a web view and whatnot.
So that's a thing that people might not care about Python for,
but it happens to be written in Python.
So it's a perfect thing to pipx install.
Exactly.
Yeah, so talk us through, if I pipx install glances,
what happens?
Yeah, sure.
So the first thing is pipx will try
to determine which package you're trying to install.
So you can give it just the name glances,
or you can give it basically any pip specifier,
any kind of, it can be a Git repository,
it can be a wheel, anything pip can install, pipx can install.
So first it will make sure that it's a valid package
specification.
Then it will create a virtual environment in this directory
that pipx manages.
So it'll make a virtual environment
with the name of the package.
It'll make a Glances virtual environment.
Then it will do some introspection on the--
then it will install Glances into the virtual environment.
So now we have a virtual environment
with Glances installed, but it's not
accessible anywhere other than inside
that virtual environment.
And so the next thing it does is it
does some introspection on the virtual environment
to say, what binaries do we have available?
And so it would be expecting Glances to be available.
And it will then take--
it'll find the path to the Glances binary
and create a symlink into a directory on your path,
on your shell's path, so that when you run that command,
it's available.
Right.
So for example, you need to have--
and your little example here was home/csmith/.local/bin.
And then that's the folder where all the symlink stuff
gets linked over.
You can also do those with entry points, right?
It'll find the entry points and make them available?
- Yeah, so these are entry points.
These are the console scripts.
- Okay.
Yeah, all right.
So that leads me to a question out in the audience
from Ratul.
Ratul says, "This looks great.
"Not sure if I missed it,
"but how do you get your built Python app
"to be pipx installable?"
So you said it has to be pip installable,
but then I think the other point here,
you would have to expose some functionality in a way,
and that could be entry points, right?
Yeah, so pretty much that is essentially the only way,
is the console script entry point.
So you can look this up.
It's a kind of well-defined part of the packaging
specifications.
But you can define a function that you
want to call from a console script entry point.
Yeah, exactly.
So, so what you're showing here is--
- Yeah, so in your setup,
you would say something like setupTools.setup,
entryPoints equals,
and then you give it a list of a command
and then basically a module colon function, right?
So here's this example that I'll link to in the show notes.
So it's hello world equals hello world,
which is the module name,
colon sayHi, which is a function in hello world.
And once you pip install that into a virtual environment,
you could just type hello world
and it would do whatever it does for that function.
But what you're saying is if you install with pipx,
it finds these and creates basically binaries
that the system can see that it thinks it can run
called hello world, for example.
- Yeah.
When you pip install something that has a console script,
it makes this like a shell script
that calls that function for you.
And so these shell scripts just get sim linked out
onto your path by pipx.
Got it.
Yeah, so it's basically doing the install.
It's creating the virtual environment automatically
behind the scenes.
It's installing, doing basically pip install on the package.
But that drags in all of the dependencies.
But the important thing is every one of these commands,
or I guess the thing you pipx install,
It can have multiple commands as part of it.
It gets its own virtual environment that's isolated,
not just from the rest of the system, but all the other PipX things as well.
So they're versioned and they live independently, right?
Exactly.
Yeah.
And if you have... You can have more than one console script too.
A lot of times, a package will have two or three, four console script entry points,
and PipX will find all those.
Nice. Yeah.
One that comes to mind is PyJokes.
Are you familiar with PyJokes?
- Yeah, I've heard you guys talk about that
on the podcast before.
- Yeah, PyJokes is a good one.
So this one has entry points
and I always get this through PipX.
I just, you know, PipX install PyJokes
and you end up with a bunch of,
here they say Pip, so I should say PipX, right?
And then you can run PyJoke or PyJokes
and even as a programmable API
And you get really deep jokes like,
why did the programmer quit their job?
'Cause they didn't get a raise.
A raise is in like lists.
But you know, it's those types of things, right?
You don't necessarily care that PyJoke is written in Python.
I mean, the name would maybe make you think it should be,
but right, you just wanna have a command
that you can type something
and get a funny programmer joke out of it, right?
But maybe we could touch on some of the other things
that are more useful than PyJoke.
Like one you mentioned was the GDB GUI.
I gave a shout out to Glances
'cause Glances, I said is fantastic.
I use Glances all the time.
It just happens to be written in Python,
but I just want it on my server, right?
Maybe another one that you pointed out was HTTPI,
HTTPI, H-T-T-P-I-E.
Do you use this one?
- You know, I have not used it too much,
but I would love to find an opportunity to use it.
I would prefer it over things like curl.
- Yeah, I love HTTPy.
It works just like curl in a lot of ways,
but the results that it gives you,
it gives you syntax highlighting,
easy ability to say, just show me the headers
and the response headers and stuff that came back
and cookies and it does highlighting on those.
It's really nice.
It just pipx install HTTP pi
and then you get HTTP as a command and HTTPS.
Here's another one with two entry points, right?
So if you just wanna say HTTP 127.0.0.1,
you don't have to say HTTP colon slash slash server name.
You can just say the command, either HTTP or HTTPS
and it'll do it, it's just a little bit shorter.
So this one, big fan.
But what was surprising to me about this is,
this is backed by a company, right?
There's like a whole bigger organization
behind ACP Pi than I realized, I believe.
So I think so.
- Yeah, I was impressed with their website.
It was a lot more polished
on a lot of other open source projects.
So I'm not surprised to hear that they're funded
or they're part of a company.
- Yeah, exactly.
At the bottom it says like, there's a whole jobs section.
There's apparently four jobs for ACPy, which is incredible.
At the same time, it's a fantastic tool.
So, you know, good on them.
Let's see, maybe some of the other ones.
I know we had a little bit of a list
of stuff that could be fun.
Py installer, py2app.
- Yeah.
- Let's see, PyInstaller, Py2App, Cython,
a lot of the package management stuff, poetry,
pipenv, yeah, anything else you wanna give a shout out to?
Oh, I've got one I want to as well,
but go ahead and do yours.
- Another program I made, I guess I'll plug my own,
one of my other projects, it's called TermPair.
So this is actually kind of a web app.
It lets you share your terminal session through the web,
but it does it by encrypting all the output and input
from your terminal.
And so basically, you run this command, term pair share,
and then it will start sharing through this server.
And then you can either--
you can control it from the web app,
or you can control it from the terminal.
And the process running in the terminal is a Python app.
And then, of course, the web app is JavaScript and React.
Yeah, how interesting.
Does it give you your normal shell,
or is it like a bare Bash or Z shell or something?
By default, it uses--
Like, if I do a super configuration of my shell
and make it all blinged out, and then I run this,
do I get the same crazy configuration,
or is it a simpler version?
Now it's the exact same thing.
It'll just run whatever the shell environment variable is
that you're running.
That's the default command.
You can run any command you want.
If you want to run Python, you can run Python.
It'll share your Python session.
You can run anything, really.
But if you run a shell, that's the most familiar thing,
I think, for sharing.
>> Sure, sure.
Interesting.
It'll share basically any CLI thing, huh?
So yeah, it spawns a PTY process.
And then any output or input just gets written
and behaves like any other terminal would.
So you can do stuff like, this is Htop
where you're interacting with it.
And it's kind of like rewriting lines to the screen
and it's able to handle all that.
- It might be a nice way to help people
or like, you know, I'm stuck, I can't get this to work.
you're in a email exchange or a Zoom meeting or something,
you know, run this and give me the link
and I'll just, let me just ask your system a question
real quick and see if it does the same.
You got to have a lot of trust
to give this over to people though, right?
- Yeah, you know, I made it because it seemed really fun.
It was a challenge, it seemed fun.
Practically speaking, yeah, I don't know how often it's used.
You'd have to totally trust somebody to not,
I mean, they have full control over your computer.
- Sure, it's not that different
than going to a Zoom meeting and say,
allow so-and-so to share, to control my mouse and keyboard
or team viewer or something like that, right?
- That's true. Yeah, that's true.
- Yeah, yeah.
But still pretty neat.
I know it's just so more visceral,
it's sort of right there.
You can just RMRF it right there.
- Yeah.
- There's another one I want to pull up here.
This one, PLS, you use PLS, Ernie?
- Yeah, I've tried it out.
It's pretty cool.
I like that you can do so many different things.
I like how easy it is to develop applications in Python,
where you can just kind of make whatever customizations
and hack things up really quickly.
- Absolutely.
So PLS is, it's a little hard probably to see
over the screen share.
It's a replacement for LS.
And I know there are many replacements for LS,
but this one is cool
'cause it's a developer-friendly one.
And so when you interact with it,
it will use a lot of different things.
For example, to show icons for, you know,
like Python logos next to .py files,
JavaScript logos next to JS files and so on.
But it will also use like git ignore files
to decide what shows up in the basic view.
It'll use, it'll show you the git status of the file
when you do a PLS --details,
you'll see which files in that listing are modified in Git,
according to Git and so on.
So there's just a ton of fun stuff here
that you can check out.
I definitely think it's neat.
Here's some examples of some of the colors.
For example, poetry.lock, because it's Git ignored,
but still important, it shows up,
but it's a very faint color,
whereas other files show up with regular color.
So this one is another one that's good to pipx install,
'cause you just need it once for your computer.
- Yeah, I love those colors too.
Great color scheme.
- Yeah, yeah, absolutely.
And apparently you can build little plugins
and stuff for it, I think in Python.
I haven't tried to do that.
I've just tried to use it as a user.
But yeah, that one's a fun one.
For a while I replaced LS with it.
That wasn't a super idea because it behaves weirdly
Like if you try to LS something and it doesn't exist,
you get a trace back exception instead
of just doesn't exist or nothing.
It's not perfect, but it's as a thing
that you have hanging around, it's definitely quite neat.
- Yeah, replacing system utilities
can get kind of risky.
- Yeah, yeah.
You just gotta know what you're doing.
I'm willing for this to mildly break stuff,
But if you make it, like you said, that one time,
you couldn't turn on your computer,
then you're in a bad spot.
Or if you could at least get back and edit your profile,
your shell profile, and turn those back to normal,
then you're probably okay.
Yeah.
Well, maybe real quickly, you could give us just a,
if there's any interesting, like internal,
there's some interesting tools or stuff
that happens behind the scenes with PIPX.
Give us a look inside real quick,
and then maybe we could wrap things up.
>> Any interesting internals of PipBex? Let's see.
>> Yeah, like notable libraries that uses
or something that's really valuable in there.
>> I was poking around the PyProject.toml. And there's like arg complete. Sounded interesting
to me. And then user path is new to me as well.
>> Okay. Yeah. Yeah. Sure. So, arg complete I'm a huge fan of. Arg complete is a package
that -- so, if you use arg parse, which is the standard library's argument parsing package,
A lot of times you'll want to have tab completion.
And tab completion can be really hard to write.
And so ArcComplete gives you a Python API
to tell it how tab completion should work.
And so in PipX's case, if you're going
to do something like PipX uninstall a package,
you have to give a name of a package that's been installed.
And so with ArcComplete, you can say PipX uninstall tab.
And then ArcComplete, you give ArcComplete a list
or a way to get a list of packages that can be uninstalled.
And then it gives you that tab completion
just like you'd expect.
And it also does it across shells.
So writing it for just bash is enough to do,
but then you also have to write different completions
for fish or something like that.
And so RComplete lets you not think about that
and just use your RGPars as you normally would
with just a couple extra arguments
And then, boom, you have tab completion.
>>Right.
Yeah.
There's a whole section where you
talk about how to install completion in here
for the shells.
So if you do that for--
if you just type pip x space completions,
it'll tell you how to do that, right?
>>Right.
And RComplete's useful for--
I mean, I actually added it for Knox.
I'm a big fan of the tool Knox, which is also PIPX installable.
And Knox, a lot of times you want to, there's a lot of sessions,
you run sessions in Knox and there's a whole bunch of them.
And so having a tap completion on that was a feature I really wanted.
And I think that's where I first found out about R complete.
And then I started adding it to other projects after I found out how easy it was to use.
Right. You're like, this is not that hard. I want this everywhere, right?
Yeah.
Yeah. Cool.
The other thing that people need to remember to do
is to run pipx insure path, right?
Because you talked about,
we talked about that .local/bin in your user profile,
at least on macOS, I know that's where it goes.
It might go somewhere else in Windows,
but you wanna make sure that's in your path.
So that'll basically modify
whatever your active shell profile is
to make sure it's in your path, right?
- That's right, yeah.
And you can also modify where that binary directory is
with an environment variable if you want.
>> Okay.
How well does this work on Windows as well?
Does it work there?
Is it like PowerShell friendly and stuff like that?
>> So it does work on Windows.
I know that one of the contributors,
one of the maintainers is a Windows user
and I don't see a flood of Windows issues coming in
about this doesn't work on Windows.
So it should work on Windows, yeah.
Yeah, yeah, perfect.
OK, and then it can upgrade itself, right?
Or do you have to do pip--
do you have to do pip upgrade, like, --user
or something like that?
Yeah, so it doesn't install itself.
I was-- I'm considering making a new installer where pipx
installs itself with pipx, but I'm not
sure I'm going to land that.
But right now, we install pipx with pip,
and so you would just upgrade it normally with, like, pip
like pip upgrade pipX.
- Sure, okay.
- Or is pip install--
- Yeah, another thing, right.
Another thing that I like about pipX
is you can just say pipX, what is it?
Upgrade all, or there's a command to just upgrade.
Just, you know what?
Give me a new version of all my libraries,
which comes back to similar with apt,
similar to homebrew, right?
Now there's a brew update and outdated
and just show me the stuff that could be updated,
and then we'll just do it.
Same with Chocolaty.
Just to keep the tools you use fresh.
It's really nice.
Yeah, it kind of goes back to, I have this program.
I don't really care about that it's written in Python.
I just want this thing to work.
I want the newest version of it, and just kind of make it happen.
Right, but if we reverse that and we're
talking to Python developers, as most people listening are,
you can empower people to deliver their applications
to end users in a way that is much, much, much simpler
if they're not Python people, right?
- Yeah, I mean- - If they can get PIPX
on their machine, then getting the rest of their stuff
is basically done, right?
- That's a great point, yeah.
I mean, the distribution story gets a lot easier
for your users.
If you're a developer and you wanna get this
in people's hands, having them use PIPX
is gonna cause them less headaches
and it's gonna cause you less headaches
because it's going to be a more predictable environment
to install in.
Because PIPX lives in the center of a few things.
Like you have Wheels, which are pre-built packages specific
to your operating system.
And you have PIP, and PIPX and virtual environments.
And PIPX kind of marries them all together
in a way where it takes the pre-built--
it doesn't have to rebuild it on the user's computer.
It takes this pre-built thing that works.
it puts it in a place that's not going to disturb anything.
It's not going to get disturbed either.
And then it makes it accessible to the end user.
And they don't have to think about any of those pieces
to get it on their computer.
Yeah.
So maybe one of the biggest takeaways
is if you're trying to deliver Python applications to people,
here's a really good option.
If some kind of CLI starter is the way to go, right?
I guess if you want--
here's how you drag it over to your applications folder
and put it in your doc, maybe that's not the right thing.
But for a lot of the type of stuff
people are building with Python,
it's a great way to get it to end users
and keep it up to date.
- Yeah.
One other thing I'll call out is PipX run.
- Yes, yeah, we've talked about install the whole time,
but yeah, PipX run is maybe even better for certain things.
- Yeah, so PipX run will make sure you have
a recent version of the tool you're trying to use.
So if you wanna run some kind of a bootstrap program
or some kind of like cookie cutter
where you create a new project or something like that,
and you'd want it to run with the recent version,
PipX run will just kind of make it happen for you.
- Right, so one of your commands might be,
well, first you're gonna set up a virtual environment,
and then you're gonna pip install cookie cutter,
then you're gonna run cookie cutter this thing, right?
Or maybe the step is, if you already have PipX,
assuming this is a thing that's accessible,
you PipX, instead of install run cookie cutter,
and you give it that command,
nobody needs or wants cookie cutter after that.
They just need cookie cutter to run the skeleton generator
for their project.
And then their project is kind of free from cookie cutter
'cause you can't update your project afterwards anyway.
That's probably a good mental model to have.
- Yeah, and that's how the JavaScript world uses it.
It's kind of like, that's one of the really popular ways
that you'll see the NPX, create React app
is a way to start React apps
with the latest version of that cookie cutter type thing.
And so I would love to see more adoption
on that side in the Python world.
- Yeah, absolutely.
Another one, I guess, let's just real quick,
maybe give a shout out to this,
is Node.js thing that just got added.
Isn't there a way that just came out
for installing Node.js as a dependency,
not just for the bindings?
I feel like there just was.
- Yeah, I saw something about this.
- Yeah, actually I think we just covered it on Python Bytes.
I was the one who brought it up,
so I don't totally remember, let's see.
There you go, nodejs-bin, that's it.
Gina Houska covered it and yeah, there it is,
nodejs-bin, so if you've got something
that needs to have the node tools around or CLI stuff,
you could just pip install nodejs-bin.
So I guess you could also pip x install nodejs-bin.
>> Yeah, maybe if it's an entry point, then for sure.
>> Yeah, I haven't thought enough about it.
So maybe it doesn't quite fit in there,
but it's an interesting development.
All right, Chad, well, I think we're probably out of time
for talking about pipx.
Let's maybe wrap things up.
Any final thoughts or anything you
want to add to this before we get to the final two questions?
>> No, thanks for having me on and sharing
some discussion on PipX.
>> Yeah, absolutely.
It's a great tool.
All right, final two questions.
If you're going to write some Python code,
if you're going to work on PipX or your terminal replicator
or whatever you're doing, what editor are you using these days?
I use VS Code.
- Yeah, it sounds like Meta is pretty standardized on that.
Is that right?
- Yeah, that's our company wide editor.
We do a lot of work on writing extensions for it
and making it work for developers at Meta.
- Yeah, cool.
And then we've talked about a ton of PyPI packages,
but one you want to give a particular shout out to?
- Yeah, so this one is not PIPX installable,
but I think it's super cool.
MKDockStrings.
And this is a way to generate documentation from your code.
I think it's similar to Sphinx.
I haven't really used Sphinx too much,
but I find MKDocString is really user-friendly.
It's all marked down.
And I think it's really like a good looking UI
that it generates for you.
I think it's really easy to use
and gives you a nice end result too.
- Cool.
Fantastic. Good recommendation.
All right, final call to action.
People want to play with PipX,
develop Python apps that can be installed through PipX
and so on, what do they do?
How do they get started?
- How do they get started developing apps for PipX?
So you can use any of those tools
to get a pyproject.toml file
and have a publishable package
and make sure you have a console script entry point.
Really all you have to do
is have a console script entry point for your package
And then PipX will take care of it for you.
- Yeah, it's worked with everything
that I've tried it with, so it seems pretty solid.
- Great, yeah.
- Awesome, all right, well, thanks again for being here
and for working on PipX, it's a great project.
- All right, thanks a lot for having me.
- Yeah, you bet, bye.